lecture_notes/shell/01-filedir.md, before:

---
layout: lesson
root: ../..
title: Files and Directories
---
<div class="objectives" markdown="1">

#### Objectives
*   Explain the similarities and differences between a file and a directory.
*   Translate an absolute path into a relative path and vice versa.
*   Construct absolute and relative paths that identify specific files and directories.
*   Explain the steps in the shell's read-run-print cycle.
*   Identify the actual command, flags, and filenames in a command-line call.
*   Demonstrate the use of tab completion, and explain its advantages.

</div>

The part of the operating system responsible for managing files and directories
is called the [file system](../../gloss.html#filesystem).
It organizes our data into files,
which hold information,
and directories (also called "folders"),
which hold files or other directories.

Several commands are frequently used to create, inspect, rename, and delete files and directories.
To start exploring them,
let's open a shell window:

~~~
$
~~~
{:class="in"}

The dollar sign is a [prompt](../../gloss.html#prompt),
which shows us that the shell is waiting for input;
your shell may show something more elaborate.

Type the command `whoami`,
then press the Enter key (sometimes marked Return) to send the command to the shell.
The command's output is the ID of the current user,
i.e.,
it shows us who the shell thinks we are:

~~~
$ whoami
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
swc
~~~
{:class="out"}

More specifically, when we type `whoami` the shell:

1.  finds a program called `whoami`,
2.  runs that program,
3.  displays that program's output, then
4.  displays a new prompt to tell us that it's ready for more commands.

Next,
let's find out where we are by running a command called `pwd`
(which stands for "print working directory").
At any moment,
our [current working directory](../../gloss.html#current-working-directory)
is our current default directory,
i.e.,
the directory that the computer assumes we want to run commands in
unless we explicitly specify something else.
Here,
the computer's response is `/users/swc`,
which my [home directory](../../gloss.html#home-directory):

~~~
$ pwd
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
/users/swc
~~~
{:class="out"}

> #### Alphabet Soup
>
> If the command to find out who we are is `whoami`, the command to find
> out where we are ought to be called `whereami`, so why is it `pwd`
> instead? The usual answer is that in the early 1970s, when Unix was
> first being developed, every keystroke counted: the devices of the day
> were slow, and backspacing on a teletype was so painful that cutting the
> number of keystrokes in order to cut the number of typing mistakes was
> actually a win for usability. The reality is that commands were added to
> Unix one by one, without any master plan, by people who were immersed in
> its jargon. The result is as inconsistent as the roolz uv Inglish
> speling, but we're stuck with it now.

To understand what a "home directory" is,
let's have a look at how the file system as a whole is organized.
At the top is the [root directory](../../gloss.html#root-directory)
that holds everything else.
We refer to it using a slash character `/` on its own;
this is the leading slash in `/users/swc`.

Inside that directory are several other directories:
`2014-07-28-stanford` (which we will be using)
`bin` (which is where some built-in programs are stored),
`data` (for miscellaneous data files),
`users` (where users' personal directories are located),
`tmp` (for temporary files that don't need to be stored long-term),
and so on:

<img src="img/filesystem.svg" alt="The Filesystem" />

We know that our current working directory `/users/swc` is stored inside `/users`
because `/users` is the first part of its name.
Similarly,
we know that `/users` is stored inside the root directory `/`
because its name begins with `/`.

Underneath `/users`,
we find one directory for each user with an account on this machine.
The Mummy's files are stored in `/users/imhotep`,
Wolfman's in `/users/larry`,
and Vlad's in `/users/vlad`.

<img src="img/home-directories.svg" alt="Home Directories" />

> Notice that there are two meanings for the `/` character.
> When it appears at the front of a file or directory name,
> it refers to the root directory. When it appears *inside* a name,
> it's just a separator.

Let's see what's in my home directory by running `ls`,
which stands for "listing":

~~~
$ ls
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
2014-07-28-stanford    bin        data
mail                   music      notes.txt
papers                 pizza.cfg  solar
solar.pdf
~~~
{:class="out"}

`ls` prints the names of the files and directories in the current directory in alphabetical order,
arranged neatly into columns.
We can make its output more comprehensible by using the [flag](../../gloss.html#command-line-flag) `-F`,
which tells `ls` to add a trailing `/` to the names of directories:

~~~
$ ls -F
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
2014-07-28-stanford/    bin/        data/
mail/                   music/      notes.txt
papers/                 pizza.cfg   solar/
solar.pdf
~~~
{:class="out"}

Here,
we can see that `/users/swc` contains [sub-directories](../../gloss.html#sub-directory).
The names that don't have trailing slashes,
like `notes.txt`, `pizza.cfg`, and `solar.pdf`,
are plain old files.
And note that there is a space between `ls` and `-F`:
without it,
the shell thinks we're trying to run a command called `ls-F`,
which doesn't exist.

> #### What's In A Name?
>
> You may have noticed that all of my files' names are "something dot
> something". This is just a convention: we can call a file `mythesis` or
> almost anything else we want. However, most people use two-part names
> most of the time to help them (and their programs) tell different kinds
> of files apart. The second part of such a name is called the
> [filename extension](../../gloss.html#filename-extension), and indicates
> what type of data the file holds: `.txt` signals a plain text file, `.pdf`
> indicates a PDF document, `.cfg` is a configuration file full of parameters
> for some program or other, and so on.
>
> This is just a convention, albeit an important one. Files contain
> bytes: it's up to us and our programs to interpret those bytes
> according to the rules for PDF documents, images, and so on.
>
> Naming a PNG image of a whale as `whale.mp3` doesn't somehow
> magically turn it into a recording of whalesong, though it *might*
> cause the operating system to try to open it with a music player
> when someone double-clicks it.

Let's go inside `2014-07-28-stanford` with `cd`.
`cd` stands for change directory.

~~~
$ cd 2014-07-28-stanford
~~~
{:class="in"}

`cd` doesn't print anything.

Notice, by the way that we spelled the directory name.
It doesn't have a trailing slash:
that's added to directory names by `ls` when we use the `-F` flag to help us tell things apart.
And it doesn't begin with a slash because it's a [relative path](../../gloss.html#relative-path),
i.e., it tells `ls` how to find something from where we are,
rather than from the root of the file system.

The leading `/` tells the computer to follow the path from the root of the filesystem,
so it always refers to exactly one directory,
no matter where we are when we run the command.

Let's make sure we are in `2014-07-28-stanford` with `pwd`.

~~~
$ pwd
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
/users/swc/2014-07-28-stanford
~~~
{:class="out"}

Let's look around with `ls`.

~~~
$ ls
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
shell     slides
~~~
{:class="out"}

Now let's look a little bit closer let's run `ls -a`.

~~~
$ ls -a -F
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
./         ../      shell/
slides/
~~~
{:class="out"}

`-a` stands for "show all"; it forces ls to show us file and directory names that begin with `.`, such as `..` (which, if we're in `/users/swc/2014-07-28-stanford/`, refers to the `/users/swc directory`). As you can see, it also displays another special directory that's just called `.`, which means "the current working directory". It may seem redundant to have a name for it, but we'll see some uses for it soon.

<img src="img/directories.png" alt="./ and .//" />

Let's look at `ls -F .` and `ls -F ..`

~~~
$ ls -F .
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
shell     slides
~~~
{:class="out"}

~~~
$ ls -F ..
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
2014-07-28-stanford/    bin/        data/
mail/                   music/      notes.txt
papers/                 pizza.cfg   solar/
solar.pdf
~~~
{:class="out"}

We recognize the directory contents.

Let's go back to our home directory.

~~~
$ cd ..
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
$ pwd
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
/users/swc
~~~
{:class="out"}

> #### Orthogonality
>
> The special names `.` and `..` don't belong to `ls`;
> they are interpreted the same way by every program.
> For example,
> if we are in `/users/swc/data`,
> the command `ls ..` will give us a listing of `/users/swc`.
> When the meanings of the parts are the same no matter how they're combined,
> programmers say they are [orthogonal](../../gloss.html#orthogonal):
> Orthogonal systems tend to be easier for people to learn
> because there are fewer special cases and exceptions to keep track of.

Let's take an excursion to the `/bin` directory.

~~~
$ cd /bin
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
$ ls
~~~
{:class="in"}

Does anyone recognize any of the programs?

How do we get back to our home directory?

#### Nelle's Pipeline: Organizing Files

Knowing just this much about files and directories,
Nelle is ready to organize the files that the protein assay machine will create.
First,
she creates a directory called `north-pacific-gyre`
(to remind herself where the data came from).
Inside that,
she creates a directory called `2012-07-03`,
which is the date she started processing the samples.
She used to use names like `conference-paper` and `revised-results`,
but she found them hard to understand after a couple of years.
(The final straw was when she found herself creating
a directory called `revised-revised-results-3`.)

> Nelle names her directories "year-month-day",
> with leading zeroes for months and days,
> because the shell displays file and directory names in alphabetical order.
> If she used month names,
> December would come before July;
> if she didn't use leading zeroes,
> November ('11') would come before July ('7').

Each of her physical samples is labelled according to her lab's convention
with a unique ten-character ID,
such as "NENE01729A".
This is what she used in her collection log
to record the location, time, depth, and other characteristics of the sample,
so she decides to use it as part of each data file's name.
Since the assay machine's output is plain text,
she will call her files `NENE01729A.txt`, `NENE01812A.txt`, and so on.
All 1520 files will go into the same directory.

If she is in her home directory,
Nelle can see what files she has using the command:

~~~
$ ls north-pacific-gyre/2012-07-03/
~~~
{:class="in"}

This is a lot to type,
but she can let the shell do most of the work.
If she types:

~~~
$ ls no
~~~
{:class="in"}

and then presses tab,
the shell automatically completes the directory name for her:

~~~
$ ls north-pacific-gyre/
~~~
{:class="in"}

If she presses tab again,
Bash will add `2012-07-03/` to the command,
since it's the only possible completion.
Pressing tab again does nothing,
since there are 1520 possibilities;
pressing tab twice brings up a list of all the files,
and so on.
This is called [tab completion](../../gloss.html#tab-completion),
and we will see it in many other tools as we go on.

<div class="keypoints" markdown="1">

#### Key Points
*   The file system is responsible for managing information on the disk.
*   Information is stored in files, which are stored in directories (folders).
*   Directories can also store other directories, which forms a directory tree.
*   `/` on its own is the root directory of the whole filesystem.
*   A relative path specifies a location starting from the current location.
*   An absolute path specifies a location from the root of the filesystem.
*   Directory names in a path are separated with '/' on Unix, but '\\' on Windows.
*   '..' means "the directory above the current one";
    '.' on its own means "the current directory".
*   Most files' names are `something.extension`.
    The extension isn't required,
    and doesn't guarantee anything,
    but is normally used to indicate the type of data in the file.
*   Most commands take options (flags) which begin with a '-'.

</div>

<img src="img/filesystem-challenge.svg" alt="Filesystem for Challenge Questions" />

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
If `pwd` displays `/users/thing`, what will `ls ../backup` display?
1.  `../backup: No such file or directory`
2.  `2012-12-01 2013-01-08 2013-01-27`
3.  `2012-12-01/ 2013-01-08/ 2013-01-27/`
4.  `original pnas_final pnas_sub`
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
If `pwd` displays `/users/backup`,
and `-r` tells `ls` to display things in reverse order,
what command will display:

~~~
pnas-sub/ pnas-final/ original/
~~~

1.  `ls pwd`
2.  `ls -r -F`
3.  `ls -r -F /users/backup`
4.  Either \#2 or \#3 above, but not \#1.
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
What does the command `cd` without a directory name do?
1.  It has no effect.
2.  It changes the working directory to `/`.
3.  It changes the working directory to the user's home directory.
4.  It produces an error message.
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
What does the command `ls` do when used with the -s and -h arguments?
</div>

Commit message:

Replace Stanford references with LBL.

lecture_notes/shell/01-filedir.md, after:

---
layout: lesson
root: ../..
title: Files and Directories
---
<div class="objectives" markdown="1">

#### Objectives
*   Explain the similarities and differences between a file and a directory.
*   Translate an absolute path into a relative path and vice versa.
*   Construct absolute and relative paths that identify specific files and directories.
*   Explain the steps in the shell's read-run-print cycle.
*   Identify the actual command, flags, and filenames in a command-line call.
*   Demonstrate the use of tab completion, and explain its advantages.

</div>

The part of the operating system responsible for managing files and directories
is called the [file system](../../gloss.html#filesystem).
It organizes our data into files,
which hold information,
and directories (also called "folders"),
which hold files or other directories.

Several commands are frequently used to create, inspect, rename, and delete files and directories.
To start exploring them,
let's open a shell window:

~~~
$
~~~
{:class="in"}

The dollar sign is a [prompt](../../gloss.html#prompt),
which shows us that the shell is waiting for input;
your shell may show something more elaborate.

Type the command `whoami`,
then press the Enter key (sometimes marked Return) to send the command to the shell.
The command's output is the ID of the current user,
i.e.,
it shows us who the shell thinks we are:

~~~
$ whoami
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
swc
~~~
{:class="out"}

More specifically, when we type `whoami` the shell:

1.  finds a program called `whoami`,
2.  runs that program,
3.  displays that program's output, then
4.  displays a new prompt to tell us that it's ready for more commands.

Next,
let's find out where we are by running a command called `pwd`
(which stands for "print working directory").
At any moment,
our [current working directory](../../gloss.html#current-working-directory)
is our current default directory,
i.e.,
the directory that the computer assumes we want to run commands in
unless we explicitly specify something else.
Here,
the computer's response is `/users/swc`,
which my [home directory](../../gloss.html#home-directory):

~~~
$ pwd
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
/users/swc
~~~
{:class="out"}

> #### Alphabet Soup
>
> If the command to find out who we are is `whoami`, the command to find
> out where we are ought to be called `whereami`, so why is it `pwd`
> instead? The usual answer is that in the early 1970s, when Unix was
> first being developed, every keystroke counted: the devices of the day
> were slow, and backspacing on a teletype was so painful that cutting the
> number of keystrokes in order to cut the number of typing mistakes was
> actually a win for usability. The reality is that commands were added to
> Unix one by one, without any master plan, by people who were immersed in
> its jargon. The result is as inconsistent as the roolz uv Inglish
> speling, but we're stuck with it now.

To understand what a "home directory" is,
let's have a look at how the file system as a whole is organized.
At the top is the [root directory](../../gloss.html#root-directory)
that holds everything else.
We refer to it using a slash character `/` on its own;
this is the leading slash in `/users/swc`.

Inside that directory are several other directories:
`2014-12-16-lbl-student` (which we will be using)
`bin` (which is where some built-in programs are stored),
`data` (for miscellaneous data files),
`users` (where users' personal directories are located),
`tmp` (for temporary files that don't need to be stored long-term),
and so on:

<img src="img/filesystem.svg" alt="The Filesystem" />

We know that our current working directory `/users/swc` is stored inside `/users`
because `/users` is the first part of its name.
Similarly,
we know that `/users` is stored inside the root directory `/`
because its name begins with `/`.

Underneath `/users`,
we find one directory for each user with an account on this machine.
The Mummy's files are stored in `/users/imhotep`,
Wolfman's in `/users/larry`,
and Vlad's in `/users/vlad`.

<img src="img/home-directories.svg" alt="Home Directories" />

> Notice that there are two meanings for the `/` character.
> When it appears at the front of a file or directory name,
> it refers to the root directory. When it appears *inside* a name,
> it's just a separator.

Let's see what's in my home directory by running `ls`,
which stands for "listing":

~~~
$ ls
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
2014-12-16-lbl-student    bin        data
mail                   music      notes.txt
papers                 pizza.cfg  solar
solar.pdf
~~~
{:class="out"}

`ls` prints the names of the files and directories in the current directory in alphabetical order,
arranged neatly into columns.
We can make its output more comprehensible by using the [flag](../../gloss.html#command-line-flag) `-F`,
which tells `ls` to add a trailing `/` to the names of directories:

~~~
$ ls -F
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
2014-12-16-lbl-student/    bin/        data/
mail/                   music/      notes.txt
papers/                 pizza.cfg   solar/
solar.pdf
~~~
{:class="out"}

Here,
we can see that `/users/swc` contains [sub-directories](../../gloss.html#sub-directory).
The names that don't have trailing slashes,
like `notes.txt`, `pizza.cfg`, and `solar.pdf`,
are plain old files.
And note that there is a space between `ls` and `-F`:
without it,
the shell thinks we're trying to run a command called `ls-F`,
which doesn't exist.

> #### What's In A Name?
>
> You may have noticed that all of my files' names are "something dot
> something". This is just a convention: we can call a file `mythesis` or
> almost anything else we want. However, most people use two-part names
> most of the time to help them (and their programs) tell different kinds
> of files apart. The second part of such a name is called the
> [filename extension](../../gloss.html#filename-extension), and indicates
> what type of data the file holds: `.txt` signals a plain text file, `.pdf`
> indicates a PDF document, `.cfg` is a configuration file full of parameters
> for some program or other, and so on.
>
> This is just a convention, albeit an important one. Files contain
> bytes: it's up to us and our programs to interpret those bytes
> according to the rules for PDF documents, images, and so on.
>
> Naming a PNG image of a whale as `whale.mp3` doesn't somehow
> magically turn it into a recording of whalesong, though it *might*
> cause the operating system to try to open it with a music player
> when someone double-clicks it.

Let's go inside `2014-12-16-lbl-student` with `cd`.
`cd` stands for change directory.

~~~
$ cd 2014-12-16-lbl-student
~~~
{:class="in"}

`cd` doesn't print anything.

Notice, by the way that we spelled the directory name.
It doesn't have a trailing slash:
that's added to directory names by `ls` when we use the `-F` flag to help us tell things apart.
And it doesn't begin with a slash because it's a [relative path](../../gloss.html#relative-path),
i.e., it tells `ls` how to find something from where we are,
rather than from the root of the file system.

The leading `/` tells the computer to follow the path from the root of the filesystem,
so it always refers to exactly one directory,
no matter where we are when we run the command.

Let's make sure we are in `2014-12-16-lbl-student` with `pwd`.

~~~
$ pwd
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
/users/swc/2014-12-16-lbl-student
~~~
{:class="out"}

Let's look around with `ls`.

~~~
$ ls
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
shell     README.md
~~~
{:class="out"}

Now let's look a little bit closer let's run `ls -a`.

~~~
$ ls -a -F
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
./         ../      shell/
README.md
~~~
{:class="out"}

`-a` stands for "show all"; it forces ls to show us file and directory names that begin with `.`, such as `..` (which, if we're in `/users/swc/2014-12-16-lbl-student/`, refers to the `/users/swc directory`). As you can see, it also displays another special directory that's just called `.`, which means "the current working directory". It may seem redundant to have a name for it, but we'll see some uses for it soon.

<img src="img/directories.png" alt="./ and .//" />

Let's look at `ls -F .` and `ls -F ..`

~~~
$ ls -F .
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
shell/     README.md
~~~
{:class="out"}

~~~
$ ls -F ..
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
2014-12-16-lbl-student/    bin/        data/
mail/                   music/      notes.txt
papers/                 pizza.cfg   solar/
solar.pdf
~~~
{:class="out"}

We recognize the directory contents.

Let's go back to our home directory.

~~~
$ cd ..
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
$ pwd
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
/users/swc
~~~
{:class="out"}

> #### Orthogonality
>
> The special names `.` and `..` don't belong to `ls`;
> they are interpreted the same way by every program.
> For example,
> if we are in `/users/swc/data`,
> the command `ls ..` will give us a listing of `/users/swc`.
> When the meanings of the parts are the same no matter how they're combined,
> programmers say they are [orthogonal](../../gloss.html#orthogonal):
> Orthogonal systems tend to be easier for people to learn
> because there are fewer special cases and exceptions to keep track of.

Let's take an excursion to the `/bin` directory.

~~~
$ cd /bin
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
$ ls
~~~
{:class="in"}

Does anyone recognize any of the programs?

How do we get back to our home directory?

#### Nelle's Pipeline: Organizing Files

Knowing just this much about files and directories,
Nelle is ready to organize the files that the protein assay machine will create.
First,
she creates a directory called `north-pacific-gyre`
(to remind herself where the data came from).
Inside that,
she creates a directory called `2012-07-03`,
which is the date she started processing the samples.
She used to use names like `conference-paper` and `revised-results`,
but she found them hard to understand after a couple of years.
(The final straw was when she found herself creating
a directory called `revised-revised-results-3`.)

> Nelle names her directories "year-month-day",
> with leading zeroes for months and days,
> because the shell displays file and directory names in alphabetical order.
> If she used month names,
> December would come before July;
> if she didn't use leading zeroes,
> November ('11') would come before July ('7').

Each of her physical samples is labelled according to her lab's convention
with a unique ten-character ID,
such as "NENE01729A".
This is what she used in her collection log
to record the location, time, depth, and other characteristics of the sample,
so she decides to use it as part of each data file's name.
Since the assay machine's output is plain text,
she will call her files `NENE01729A.txt`, `NENE01812A.txt`, and so on.
All 1520 files will go into the same directory.

If she is in her home directory,
Nelle can see what files she has using the command:

~~~
$ ls north-pacific-gyre/2012-07-03/
~~~
{:class="in"}

This is a lot to type,
but she can let the shell do most of the work.
If she types:

~~~
$ ls no
~~~
{:class="in"}

and then presses tab,
the shell automatically completes the directory name for her:

~~~
$ ls north-pacific-gyre/
~~~
{:class="in"}

If she presses tab again,
Bash will add `2012-07-03/` to the command,
since it's the only possible completion.
Pressing tab again does nothing,
since there are 1520 possibilities;
pressing tab twice brings up a list of all the files,
and so on.
This is called [tab completion](../../gloss.html#tab-completion),
and we will see it in many other tools as we go on.

<div class="keypoints" markdown="1">

#### Key Points
*   The file system is responsible for managing information on the disk.
*   Information is stored in files, which are stored in directories (folders).
*   Directories can also store other directories, which forms a directory tree.
*   `/` on its own is the root directory of the whole filesystem.
*   A relative path specifies a location starting from the current location.
*   An absolute path specifies a location from the root of the filesystem.
*   Directory names in a path are separated with '/' on Unix, but '\\' on Windows.
*   '..' means "the directory above the current one";
    '.' on its own means "the current directory".
*   Most files' names are `something.extension`.
    The extension isn't required,
    and doesn't guarantee anything,
    but is normally used to indicate the type of data in the file.
*   Most commands take options (flags) which begin with a '-'.

</div>

<img src="img/filesystem-challenge.svg" alt="Filesystem for Challenge Questions" />

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
If `pwd` displays `/users/thing`, what will `ls ../backup` display?
1.  `../backup: No such file or directory`
2.  `2012-12-01 2013-01-08 2013-01-27`
3.  `2012-12-01/ 2013-01-08/ 2013-01-27/`
4.  `original pnas_final pnas_sub`
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
If `pwd` displays `/users/backup`,
and `-r` tells `ls` to display things in reverse order,
what command will display:

~~~
pnas-sub/ pnas-final/ original/
~~~

1.  `ls pwd`
2.  `ls -r -F`
3.  `ls -r -F /users/backup`
4.  Either \#2 or \#3 above, but not \#1.
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
What does the command `cd` without a directory name do?
1.  It has no effect.
2.  It changes the working directory to `/`.
3.  It changes the working directory to the user's home directory.
4.  It produces an error message.
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
What does the command `ls` do when used with the -s and -h arguments?
</div>
