lecture_notes/shell/03-pipefilter.md, before:

---
layout: lesson
root: ../..
title: Pipes and Filters
---
<div class="objectives" markdown="1">

#### Objectives
*   Redirect a command's output to a file.
*   Process a file instead of keyboard input using redirection.
*   Construct command pipelines with two or more stages.
*   Explain what usually happens if a program or pipeline isn't given any input to process.
*   Explain Unix's "small pieces, loosely joined" philosophy.

</div>

Now that we know a few basic commands,
we can finally look at the shell's most powerful feature:
the ease with which it lets us combine existing programs in new ways.
We'll start with a directory called `molecules`
that contains six files describing some simple organic molecules.
The `.pdb` extension indicates that these files are in Protein Data Bank format,
a simple text format that specifies the type and position of each atom in the molecule.

~~~
$ ls molecules
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
cubane.pdb    ethane.pdb    methane.pdb
octane.pdb    pentane.pdb   propane.pdb
~~~
{:class="out"}

Let's go into that directory with `cd` and run the command `wc *.pdb`.
`wc` is the "word count" command:
it counts the number of lines, words, and characters in files.
The `*` in `*.pdb` matches zero or more characters,
so the shell turns `*.pdb` into a complete list of `.pdb` files:

~~~
$ cd molecules
$ wc *.pdb
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  20  156 1158 cubane.pdb
  12   84  622 ethane.pdb
   9   57  422 methane.pdb
  30  246 1828 octane.pdb
  21  165 1226 pentane.pdb
  15  111  825 propane.pdb
 107  819 6081 total
~~~
{:class="out"}

> #### Wildcards
> 
> `*` is a [wildcard](../../gloss.html#wildcard). It matches zero or more
> characters, so `*.pdb` matches `ethane.pdb`, `propane.pdb`, and so on.
> On the other hand, `p*.pdb` only matches `pentane.pdb` and
> `propane.pdb`, because the 'p' at the front only matches itself.
> 
> `?` is also a wildcard, but it only matches a single character. This
> means that `p?.pdb` matches `pi.pdb` or `p5.pdb`, but not `propane.pdb`.
> We can use any number of wildcards at a time: for example, `p*.p?*`
> matches anything that starts with a 'p' and ends with '.', 'p', and at
> least one more character (since the '?' has to match one character, and
> the final '\*' can match any number of characters). Thus, `p*.p?*` would
> match `preferred.practice`, and even `p.pi` (since the first '\*' can
> match no characters at all), but not `quality.practice` (doesn't start
> with 'p') or `preferred.p` (there isn't at least one character after the
> '.p').
> 
> When the shell sees a wildcard, it expands the wildcard to create a
> list of matching filenames *before* running the command that was
> asked for.  This means that commands like `wc` and `ls` never see
> the wildcard characters, just what those wildcards matched. This is
> another example of orthogonal design.

If we run `wc -l` instead of just `wc`,
the output shows only the number of lines per file:

~~~
$ wc -l *.pdb
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  20  cubane.pdb
  12  ethane.pdb
   9  methane.pdb
  30  octane.pdb
  21  pentane.pdb
  15  propane.pdb
 107  total
~~~
{:class="out"}

We can also use `-w` to get only the number of words,
or `-c` to get only the number of characters.

Which of these files is shortest?
It's an easy question to answer when there are only six files,
but what if there were 6000?
Our first step toward a solution is to run the command:

~~~
$ wc -l *.pdb > lengths
~~~
{:class="in"}

The `>` tells the shell to [redirect](../../gloss.html#redirect) the command's output
to a file instead of printing it to the screen.
The shell will create the file if it doesn't exist,
or overwrite the contents of that file if it does.
(This is why there is no screen output:
everything that `wc` would have printed has gone into the file `lengths` instead.)
`ls lengths` confirms that the file exists:

~~~
$ ls lengths
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
lengths
~~~
{:class="out"}

We can now send the content of `lengths` to the screen using `cat lengths`.
`cat` stands for "concatenate":
it prints the contents of files one after another.
There's only one file in this case,
so `cat` just shows us what it contains:

~~~
$ cat lengths
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  20  cubane.pdb
  12  ethane.pdb
   9  methane.pdb
  30  octane.pdb
  21  pentane.pdb
  15  propane.pdb
 107  total
~~~
{:class="out"}

Now let's use the `sort` command to sort its contents.
This does *not* change the file;
instead, it sends the sorted result to the screen:

~~~
$ sort lengths
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  9  methane.pdb
 12  ethane.pdb
 15  propane.pdb
 20  cubane.pdb
 21  pentane.pdb
 30  octane.pdb
107  total
~~~
{:class="out"}

We can put the sorted list of lines in another temporary file called `sorted-lengths`
by putting `> sorted-lengths` after the command,
just as we used `> lengths` to put the output of `wc` into `lengths`.
Once we've done that,
we can run another command called `head` to get the first few lines in `sorted-lengths`:

~~~
$ sort lengths > sorted-lengths
$ head -1 sorted-lengths
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  9  methane.pdb
~~~
{:class="out"}

Using the parameter `-1` with `head` tells it that
we only want the first line of the file;
`-20` would get the first 20,
and so on.
Since `sorted-lengths` contains the lengths of our files ordered from least to greatest,
the output of `head` must be the file with the fewest lines.

If you think this is confusing,
you're in good company:
even once you understand what `wc`, `sort`, and `head` do,
all those intermediate files make it hard to follow what's going on.
We can make it easier to understand by running `sort` and `head` together:

~~~
$ sort lengths | head -1
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  9  methane.pdb
~~~
{:class="out"}

The vertical bar between the two commands is called a [pipe](../../gloss.html#pipe).
It tells the shell that we want to use
the output of the command on the left
as the input to the command on the right.
The computer might create a temporary file if it needs to,
or copy data from one program to the other in memory,
or something else entirely;
we don't have to know or care.

We can use another pipe to send the output of `wc` directly to `sort`,
which then sends its output to `head`:

~~~
$ wc -l *.pdb | sort | head -1
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  9  methane.pdb
~~~
{:class="out"}

This is exactly like a mathematician nesting functions like *sin(&pi;x)<sup>2</sup>*
and saying "the square of the sine of *x* times &pi;".
In our case,
the calculation is "head of sort of word count of `*.pdb`".

Here's what actually happens behind the scenes when we create a pipe.
When a computer runs a program&mdash;any program&mdash;it creates a [process](../../gloss.html#process)
in memory to hold the program's software and its current state.
Every process has an input channel called [standard input](../../gloss.html#standard-input).
(By this point, you may be surprised that the name is so memorable, but don't worry:
most Unix programmers call it "stdin".
Every process also has a default output channel called [standard output](../../gloss.html#standard-output)
(or "stdout").

The shell is actually just another program.
Under normal circumstances,
whatever we type on the keyboard is sent to the shell on its standard input,
and whatever it produces on standard output is displayed on our screen.
When we tell the shell to run a program,
it creates a new process
and temporarily sends whatever we type on our keyboard to that process's standard input,
and whatever the process sends to standard output to the screen.

Here's what happens when we run `wc -l *.pdb > lengths`.
The shell starts by telling the computer to create a new process to run the `wc` program.
Since we've provided some filenames as parameters,
`wc` reads from them instead of from standard input.
And since we've used `>` to redirect output to a file,
the shell connects the process's standard output to that file.

If we run `wc -l *.pdb | sort` instead,
the shell creates two processes
(one for each process in the pipe)
so that `wc` and `sort` run simultaneously.
The standard output of `wc` is fed directly to the standard input of `sort`;
since there's no redirection with `>`,
`sort`'s output goes to the screen.
And if we run `wc -l *.pdb | sort | head -1`,
we get three processes with data flowing from the files,
through `wc` to `sort`,
and from `sort` through `head` to the screen.

This simple idea is why Unix has been so successful.
Instead of creating enormous programs that try to do many different things,
Unix programmers focus on creating lots of simple tools that each do one job well,
and that work well with each other.
This programming model is called [pipes and filters](../../gloss.html#pipe-and-filter).
We've already seen pipes;
a [filter](../../gloss.html#filter) is a program like `wc` or `sort`
that transforms a stream of input into a stream of output.
Almost all of the standard Unix tools can work this way:
unless told to do otherwise,
they read from standard input,
do something with what they've read,
and write to standard output.

The key is that any program that reads lines of text from standard input
and writes lines of text to standard output
can be combined with every other program that behaves this way as well.
You can *and should* write your programs this way
so that you and other people can put those programs into pipes to multiply their power.

> #### Redirecting Input
> 
> As well as using `>` to redirect a program's output, we can use `<` to
> redirect its input, i.e., to read from a file instead of from standard
> input. For example, instead of writing `wc ammonia.pdb`, we could write
> `wc < ammonia.pdb`. In the first case, `wc` gets a command line
> parameter telling it what file to open. In the second, `wc` doesn't have
> any command line parameters, so it reads from standard input, but we
> have told the shell to send the contents of `ammonia.pdb` to `wc`'s
> standard input.

#### Nelle's Pipeline: Checking Files

Nelle has run her samples through the assay machines
and created 1520 files in the `north-pacific-gyre/2012-07-03` directory described earlier.
As a quick sanity check, she types:

~~~
$ cd north-pacific-gyre/2012-07-03
$ wc -l *.txt
~~~
{:class="in"}

The output is 1520 lines that look like this:

~~~
300 NENE01729A.txt
300 NENE01729B.txt
300 NENE01736A.txt
300 NENE01751A.txt
300 NENE01751B.txt
300 NENE01812A.txt
... ...
~~~
{:class="out"}

Now she types this:

~~~
$ wc -l *.txt | sort | head -5
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
 240 NENE02018B.txt
 300 NENE01729A.txt
 300 NENE01729B.txt
 300 NENE01736A.txt
 300 NENE01751A.txt
~~~
{:class="out"}

Whoops: one of the files is 60 lines shorter than the others.
When she goes back and checks it,
she sees that she did that assay at 8:00 on a Monday morning&mdash;someone
was probably in using the machine on the weekend,
and she forgot to reset it.
Before re-running that sample,
she checks to see if any files have too much data:

~~~
$ wc -l *.txt | sort | tail -5
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
 300 NENE02040A.txt
 300 NENE02040B.txt
 300 NENE02040Z.txt
 300 NENE02043A.txt
 300 NENE02043B.txt
~~~
{:class="out"}

Those numbers look good&mdash;but what's that 'Z' doing there in the third-to-last line?
All of her samples should be marked 'A' or 'B';
by convention,
her lab uses 'Z' to indicate samples with missing information.
To find others like it, she does this:

~~~
$ ls *Z.txt
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
NENE01971Z.txt    NENE02040Z.txt
~~~
{:class="out"}

Sure enough,
when she checks the log on her laptop,
there's no depth recorded for either of those samples.
Since it's too late to get the information any other way,
she must exclude those two files from her analysis.
She could just delete them using `rm`,
but there are actually some analyses she might do later where depth doesn't matter,
so instead, she'll just be careful later on to select files using the wildcard expression `*[AB].txt`.
As always,
the '\*' matches any number of characters;
the expression `[AB]` matches either an 'A' or a 'B',
so this matches all the valid data files she has.

<div class="keypoints" markdown="1">

#### Key Points
*   `command > file` redirects a command's output to a file.
*   `first | second` is a pipeline: the output of the first command is used as the input to the second.
*   The best way to use the shell is to use pipes to combine simple single-purpose programs (filters).

</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
If we run `sort` on this file:

~~~
10
2
19
22
6
~~~

the output is:

~~~
10
19
2
22
6
~~~

If we run `sort -n` on the same input, we get this instead:

~~~
2
6
10
19
22
~~~

Explain why `-n` has this effect.
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
What is the difference between:

~~~
wc -l < mydata.dat
~~~

and:

~~~
wc -l mydata.dat
~~~
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
The command `uniq` removes adjacent duplicated lines from its input.
For example, if a file `salmon.txt` contains:

~~~
coho
coho
steelhead
coho
steelhead
steelhead
~~~

then `uniq salmon.txt` produces:

~~~
coho
steelhead
coho
steelhead
~~~

Why do you think `uniq` only removes *adjacent* duplicated lines?
(Hint: think about very large data sets.) What other command could
you combine with it in a pipe to remove all duplicated lines?
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
A file called `animals.txt` contains the following data:

~~~
2012-11-05,deer
2012-11-05,rabbit
2012-11-05,raccoon
2012-11-06,rabbit
2012-11-06,deer
2012-11-06,fox
2012-11-07,rabbit
2012-11-07,bear
~~~

What text passes through each of the pipes and the final redirect in the pipeline below?

~~~
cat animals.txt | head -5 | tail -3 | sort -r > final.txt
~~~
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
The command:

~~~
$ cut -d , -f 2 animals.txt
~~~

produces the following output:

~~~
deer
rabbit
raccoon
rabbit
deer
fox
rabbit
bear
~~~

What other command(s) could be added to this in a pipeline to find
out what animals the file contains (without any duplicates in their
names)?
</div>

Commit message:

Add '-n' option to sort, so that sort will sort number of lines. starting

lecture_notes/shell/03-pipefilter.md, after:

---
layout: lesson
root: ../..
title: Pipes and Filters
---
<div class="objectives" markdown="1">

#### Objectives
*   Redirect a command's output to a file.
*   Process a file instead of keyboard input using redirection.
*   Construct command pipelines with two or more stages.
*   Explain what usually happens if a program or pipeline isn't given any input to process.
*   Explain Unix's "small pieces, loosely joined" philosophy.

</div>

Now that we know a few basic commands,
we can finally look at the shell's most powerful feature:
the ease with which it lets us combine existing programs in new ways.
We'll start with a directory called `molecules`
that contains six files describing some simple organic molecules.
The `.pdb` extension indicates that these files are in Protein Data Bank format,
a simple text format that specifies the type and position of each atom in the molecule.

~~~
$ ls molecules
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
cubane.pdb    ethane.pdb    methane.pdb
octane.pdb    pentane.pdb   propane.pdb
~~~
{:class="out"}

Let's go into that directory with `cd` and run the command `wc *.pdb`.
`wc` is the "word count" command:
it counts the number of lines, words, and characters in files.
The `*` in `*.pdb` matches zero or more characters,
so the shell turns `*.pdb` into a complete list of `.pdb` files:

~~~
$ cd molecules
$ wc *.pdb
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  20  156 1158 cubane.pdb
  12   84  622 ethane.pdb
   9   57  422 methane.pdb
  30  246 1828 octane.pdb
  21  165 1226 pentane.pdb
  15  111  825 propane.pdb
 107  819 6081 total
~~~
{:class="out"}

> #### Wildcards
> 
> `*` is a [wildcard](../../gloss.html#wildcard). It matches zero or more
> characters, so `*.pdb` matches `ethane.pdb`, `propane.pdb`, and so on.
> On the other hand, `p*.pdb` only matches `pentane.pdb` and
> `propane.pdb`, because the 'p' at the front only matches itself.
> 
> `?` is also a wildcard, but it only matches a single character. This
> means that `p?.pdb` matches `pi.pdb` or `p5.pdb`, but not `propane.pdb`.
> We can use any number of wildcards at a time: for example, `p*.p?*`
> matches anything that starts with a 'p' and ends with '.', 'p', and at
> least one more character (since the '?' has to match one character, and
> the final '\*' can match any number of characters). Thus, `p*.p?*` would
> match `preferred.practice`, and even `p.pi` (since the first '\*' can
> match no characters at all), but not `quality.practice` (doesn't start
> with 'p') or `preferred.p` (there isn't at least one character after the
> '.p').
> 
> When the shell sees a wildcard, it expands the wildcard to create a
> list of matching filenames *before* running the command that was
> asked for.  This means that commands like `wc` and `ls` never see
> the wildcard characters, just what those wildcards matched. This is
> another example of orthogonal design.

If we run `wc -l` instead of just `wc`,
the output shows only the number of lines per file:

~~~
$ wc -l *.pdb
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  20  cubane.pdb
  12  ethane.pdb
   9  methane.pdb
  30  octane.pdb
  21  pentane.pdb
  15  propane.pdb
 107  total
~~~
{:class="out"}

We can also use `-w` to get only the number of words,
or `-c` to get only the number of characters.

Which of these files is shortest?
It's an easy question to answer when there are only six files,
but what if there were 6000?
Our first step toward a solution is to run the command:

~~~
$ wc -l *.pdb > lengths
~~~
{:class="in"}

The `>` tells the shell to [redirect](../../gloss.html#redirect) the command's output
to a file instead of printing it to the screen.
The shell will create the file if it doesn't exist,
or overwrite the contents of that file if it does.
(This is why there is no screen output:
everything that `wc` would have printed has gone into the file `lengths` instead.)
`ls lengths` confirms that the file exists:

~~~
$ ls lengths
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
lengths
~~~
{:class="out"}

We can now send the content of `lengths` to the screen using `cat lengths`.
`cat` stands for "concatenate":
it prints the contents of files one after another.
There's only one file in this case,
so `cat` just shows us what it contains:

~~~
$ cat lengths
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  20  cubane.pdb
  12  ethane.pdb
   9  methane.pdb
  30  octane.pdb
  21  pentane.pdb
  15  propane.pdb
 107  total
~~~
{:class="out"}

Now let's use the `sort` command to sort its contents.
This does *not* change the file;
instead, it sends the sorted result to the screen. 
We add the option `-n` to sort by numbers and not characters. 

~~~
$ sort -n lengths
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  9  methane.pdb
 12  ethane.pdb
 15  propane.pdb
 20  cubane.pdb
 21  pentane.pdb
 30  octane.pdb
107  total
~~~
{:class="out"}

We can put the sorted list of lines in another temporary file called `sorted-lengths`
by putting `> sorted-lengths` after the command,
just as we used `> lengths` to put the output of `wc` into `lengths`.
Once we've done that,
we can run another command called `head` to get the first few lines in `sorted-lengths`:

~~~
$ sort -n lengths > sorted-lengths
$ head -1 sorted-lengths
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  9  methane.pdb
~~~
{:class="out"}

Using the parameter `-1` with `head` tells it that
we only want the first line of the file;
`-20` would get the first 20,
and so on.
Since `sorted-lengths` contains the lengths of our files ordered from least to greatest,
the output of `head` must be the file with the fewest lines.

If you think this is confusing,
you're in good company:
even once you understand what `wc`, `sort`, and `head` do,
all those intermediate files make it hard to follow what's going on.
We can make it easier to understand by running `sort` and `head` together:

~~~
$ sort -n lengths | head -1
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  9  methane.pdb
~~~
{:class="out"}

The vertical bar between the two commands is called a [pipe](../../gloss.html#pipe).
It tells the shell that we want to use
the output of the command on the left
as the input to the command on the right.
The computer might create a temporary file if it needs to,
or copy data from one program to the other in memory,
or something else entirely;
we don't have to know or care.

We can use another pipe to send the output of `wc` directly to `sort`,
which then sends its output to `head`:

~~~
$ wc -l *.pdb | sort -n | head -1
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
  9  methane.pdb
~~~
{:class="out"}

This is exactly like a mathematician nesting functions like *sin(&pi;x)<sup>2</sup>*
and saying "the square of the sine of *x* times &pi;".
In our case,
the calculation is "head of sort of word count of `*.pdb`".

Here's what actually happens behind the scenes when we create a pipe.
When a computer runs a program&mdash;any program&mdash;it creates a [process](../../gloss.html#process)
in memory to hold the program's software and its current state.
Every process has an input channel called [standard input](../../gloss.html#standard-input).
(By this point, you may be surprised that the name is so memorable, but don't worry:
most Unix programmers call it "stdin".
Every process also has a default output channel called [standard output](../../gloss.html#standard-output)
(or "stdout").

The shell is actually just another program.
Under normal circumstances,
whatever we type on the keyboard is sent to the shell on its standard input,
and whatever it produces on standard output is displayed on our screen.
When we tell the shell to run a program,
it creates a new process
and temporarily sends whatever we type on our keyboard to that process's standard input,
and whatever the process sends to standard output to the screen.

Here's what happens when we run `wc -l *.pdb > lengths`.
The shell starts by telling the computer to create a new process to run the `wc` program.
Since we've provided some filenames as parameters,
`wc` reads from them instead of from standard input.
And since we've used `>` to redirect output to a file,
the shell connects the process's standard output to that file.

If we run `wc -l *.pdb | sort -n` instead,
the shell creates two processes
(one for each process in the pipe)
so that `wc` and `sort` run simultaneously.
The standard output of `wc` is fed directly to the standard input of `sort`;
since there's no redirection with `>`,
`sort`'s output goes to the screen.
And if we run `wc -l *.pdb | sort -n | head -1`,
we get three processes with data flowing from the files,
through `wc` to `sort`,
and from `sort` through `head` to the screen.

This simple idea is why Unix has been so successful.
Instead of creating enormous programs that try to do many different things,
Unix programmers focus on creating lots of simple tools that each do one job well,
and that work well with each other.
This programming model is called [pipes and filters](../../gloss.html#pipe-and-filter).
We've already seen pipes;
a [filter](../../gloss.html#filter) is a program like `wc` or `sort`
that transforms a stream of input into a stream of output.
Almost all of the standard Unix tools can work this way:
unless told to do otherwise,
they read from standard input,
do something with what they've read,
and write to standard output.

The key is that any program that reads lines of text from standard input
and writes lines of text to standard output
can be combined with every other program that behaves this way as well.
You can *and should* write your programs this way
so that you and other people can put those programs into pipes to multiply their power.

> #### Redirecting Input
> 
> As well as using `>` to redirect a program's output, we can use `<` to
> redirect its input, i.e., to read from a file instead of from standard
> input. For example, instead of writing `wc ammonia.pdb`, we could write
> `wc < ammonia.pdb`. In the first case, `wc` gets a command line
> parameter telling it what file to open. In the second, `wc` doesn't have
> any command line parameters, so it reads from standard input, but we
> have told the shell to send the contents of `ammonia.pdb` to `wc`'s
> standard input.

#### Nelle's Pipeline: Checking Files

Nelle has run her samples through the assay machines
and created 1520 files in the `north-pacific-gyre/2012-07-03` directory described earlier.
As a quick sanity check, she types:

~~~
$ cd north-pacific-gyre/2012-07-03
$ wc -l *.txt
~~~
{:class="in"}

The output is 1520 lines that look like this:

~~~
300 NENE01729A.txt
300 NENE01729B.txt
300 NENE01736A.txt
300 NENE01751A.txt
300 NENE01751B.txt
300 NENE01812A.txt
... ...
~~~
{:class="out"}

Now she types this:

~~~
$ wc -l *.txt | sort -n | head -5
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
 240 NENE02018B.txt
 300 NENE01729A.txt
 300 NENE01729B.txt
 300 NENE01736A.txt
 300 NENE01751A.txt
~~~
{:class="out"}

Whoops: one of the files is 60 lines shorter than the others.
When she goes back and checks it,
she sees that she did that assay at 8:00 on a Monday morning&mdash;someone
was probably in using the machine on the weekend,
and she forgot to reset it.
Before re-running that sample,
she checks to see if any files have too much data:

~~~
$ wc -l *.txt | sort -n | tail -5
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
 300 NENE02040A.txt
 300 NENE02040B.txt
 300 NENE02040Z.txt
 300 NENE02043A.txt
 300 NENE02043B.txt
~~~
{:class="out"}

Those numbers look good&mdash;but what's that 'Z' doing there in the third-to-last line?
All of her samples should be marked 'A' or 'B';
by convention,
her lab uses 'Z' to indicate samples with missing information.
To find others like it, she does this:

~~~
$ ls *Z.txt
~~~
{:class="in"}
~~~
NENE01971Z.txt    NENE02040Z.txt
~~~
{:class="out"}

Sure enough,
when she checks the log on her laptop,
there's no depth recorded for either of those samples.
Since it's too late to get the information any other way,
she must exclude those two files from her analysis.
She could just delete them using `rm`,
but there are actually some analyses she might do later where depth doesn't matter,
so instead, she'll just be careful later on to select files using the wildcard expression `*[AB].txt`.
As always,
the '\*' matches any number of characters;
the expression `[AB]` matches either an 'A' or a 'B',
so this matches all the valid data files she has.

<div class="keypoints" markdown="1">

#### Key Points
*   `command > file` redirects a command's output to a file.
*   `first | second` is a pipeline: the output of the first command is used as the input to the second.
*   The best way to use the shell is to use pipes to combine simple single-purpose programs (filters).

</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
If we run `sort` on this file:

~~~
10
2
19
22
6
~~~

the output is:

~~~
10
19
2
22
6
~~~

If we run `sort -n` on the same input, we get this instead:

~~~
2
6
10
19
22
~~~

Explain why `-n` has this effect.
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
What is the difference between:

~~~
wc -l < mydata.dat
~~~

and:

~~~
wc -l mydata.dat
~~~
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
The command `uniq` removes adjacent duplicated lines from its input.
For example, if a file `salmon.txt` contains:

~~~
coho
coho
steelhead
coho
steelhead
steelhead
~~~

then `uniq salmon.txt` produces:

~~~
coho
steelhead
coho
steelhead
~~~

Why do you think `uniq` only removes *adjacent* duplicated lines?
(Hint: think about very large data sets.) What other command could
you combine with it in a pipe to remove all duplicated lines?
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
A file called `animals.txt` contains the following data:

~~~
2012-11-05,deer
2012-11-05,rabbit
2012-11-05,raccoon
2012-11-06,rabbit
2012-11-06,deer
2012-11-06,fox
2012-11-07,rabbit
2012-11-07,bear
~~~

What text passes through each of the pipes and the final redirect in the pipeline below?

~~~
cat animals.txt | head -5 | tail -3 | sort -r > final.txt
~~~
</div>

<div class="challenge" markdown="1">
The command:

~~~
$ cut -d , -f 2 animals.txt
~~~

produces the following output:

~~~
deer
rabbit
raccoon
rabbit
deer
fox
rabbit
bear
~~~

What other command(s) could be added to this in a pipeline to find
out what animals the file contains (without any duplicates in their
names)?
</div>
